We have been writing the missing manual for peer-produced peer learning
- the “Peeragogy Handbook” ([peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org/)).
Throughout the building of this work, we, ourselves peer learners in
this quest, have been mindful of these four questions:
1.  *How does a motivated group of self-learners choose a subject or
    skill to learn? *
2.  *How can this group identify and select the best learning resources
    about that topic? *
3.  *How will these learners identify and select the appropriate
    technology and communications tools and platforms to accomplish
    their learning goal?*
4.  *What does the group need to know about learning theory and practice
    to put together a successful peer-learning program?*

It is clear to us that the techniques of peer production that have built
and continue to improve *Wikipedia* and GNU/Linux have yet to fully
demonstrate their power in education. We believe that the *Peeragogy
Handbook* can help change that by building a distributed community of
peer learners/educators, and a strongly vetted collection of best
practices. Our project complements others’ work on sites like
Wikiversity and P2PU, and builds upon understandings that have developed
informally in distributed communities of hobbyists and professionals, as
well as in (and beyond) the classrooms of generations of passionate
educators. Here, we present Peeragogy in Action, a project guide in four
parts. Each part relates to one or more sections of our handbook, and
suggests activities to try while you explore peer learning. These
activities are designed for flexible use by widely distributed groups,
collaborating via a light-weight infrastructure. Participants may be
educators, community organizers, designers, hackers, dancers, students,
seasoned peeragogues, or first-timers. The guide should be useful for
groups who want to build a strong collaboration, as well as to
facilitators or theorists who want to hone their practice or approach.
Together, we will use our various talents to build effective methods and
models for peer produced peer learning. Let’s get started!
![image](http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-1.jpg)
**Setting the initial challenge and building a framework for
accountability among participants is an important starting point.**

*Activity* – Come up with a plan for your work and an agreement, or
informal contract, for your group. You can use the suggestions in this
guide as a starting point, but your first task is to revise the plan to
suit your needs. It might be helpful to ask: What are you interested in
learning? What is your primary intended outcome? What problem do you
hope to solve? How collaborative does your project need to be? How will
the participants' expertise in the topic vary? What sort of support will
you and other participants require? What problems won’t you solve?

*Technology* – Familiarize yourself with the collaboration tools you
intend to use (e.g. WordPress, Git and LaTeX, YouTube, GIMP, a public
wiki, a private forum, or something else) and create a first post, edit,
or video introducing yourself and your project(s) to others in the
worldwide peeragogy community.

*Suggested Resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts I
(‘[Introduction](http://peeragogy.org/)’) and II (‘[Peer
Learning](http://peeragogy.org/peer-learning/)’). You may also want to
work through a short lesson called [Implementing
Paragogy](https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/User:Arided/ImplementingParagogy),
from the early days before the Peeragogy project was convened. For a
succinct theoretical treatment, please refer to our literature review,
which we have adapted into a [Wikipedia
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer_learning).

*Further Reading* – Boud, D. and Lee, A. (2005). *‘Peer learning’ as
pedagogic discourse for research education*. Studies in Higher
Education, 30(5):501–516.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – We had a fairly weak project
structure at the outset, which yielded mixed results. One participant
said: “I definitely think I do better when presented with a framework or
scaffold to use for participation or content development.” Yet the same
person wrote with enthusiasm about models of entrepreneurship, saying
she was “freed of the requirement or need for an entrepreneurial
visionary.” In short,

### ![image](http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-2.jpg)

**Other people can support you in achieving your goal and make the work
more fun too.**
*Activity* – Write an invitation to someone who can help as a
co-facilitator on your project. Clarify what you hope to learn from them
and what your project has to offer. Helpful questions to consider as you
think about who to invite: What resources are available or missing? What
do you already have that you can build on? How will you find the
necessary resources? Who else is interested in these kinds of
challenges? Go through the these questions again when you have a small
group, and come up with a list of more people you'd like to invite or
consult with as the project progresses.

*Technology* – Identify tools that could potentially be useful during
the project, even if it's new to you. Start learning how to use them.
Connect with people in other locales who share similar interests or know
the tools.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts V (‘[Convening a
Group](http://peeragogy.org/convening-a-group/)’) and VI (‘[Organizing a
Learning
Context](http://peeragogy.org/organizing-a-learning-context/)’).

*Recommended Reading* – Schmidt, J. Philipp. (2009). Commons-Based Peer
Production and education. Free Culture Research Workshop Harvard
University, 23 October 2009.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – We used a strategy of "open
enrollment." New people were welcome to join the project at any time. We
also encouraged people to either stay involved or withdraw; several
times over the first year, we required participants to explicitly
reaffirm interest in order to stay registered in the forum and mailing
list.

### ![image](http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-3.jpg)

**Solidifying your work plan and learning strategy together with
concrete measures for ‘success’ can move the project forward
significantly. **
*Activity* – Distill your ideas by writing an essay, making visual
sketches, or creating a short video to communicate the unique plans for
organization and evaluation that your group will use. By this time, you
should have identified which aspects of the project need to be refined
or expanded. Dive in!

*Technology* – Take time to mentor others or be mentored by someone,
meeting up in person or online. Pair up with someone else and share
knowledge together about one or more tools. You can discuss some of the
difficulties that you’ve encountered, or teach a beginner some tricks.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts VII
(‘[Co-Facilitation and
Co-Working](http://peeragogy.org/co-facilitation/)’), VII
(‘[Assessment](http://peeragogy.org/assessment/)’), and part IV
(‘[Patterns, Use cases, and
Examples](http://peeragogy.org/patterns-usecases/)’).

*Recommended reading* – Argyris, Chris. "Teaching smart people how to
learn." Harvard Business Review 69.3 (1991); and, Gersick, Connie J.G.
"Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group
development." Academy of Management Journal 31.1 (1988): 9-41.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – Perhaps one of the most
important roles in the Peeragogy project was the role of the ‘Wrapper’,
who prepared and circulated weekly summaries of forum activity. This
helped people stay informed about what was happening in the project even
if they didn’t have time to read the forums. We’ve also found that small
groups of people who arrange their own meetings are often the most
productive.

### ![image](http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-4.jpg)

**Wrap up the project with a critical assessment of progress and
directions for future work. Share any changes to this syllabus that you
think would be useful for future peeragogues!**
*Activity* – Identify the main obstacles you encountered. What are some
goals you were not able to accomplish yet? Did you foresee these
challenges at the outset? How did this project resemble or differ from
others you’ve worked on? How would you do things differently in future
projects? What would you like to tackle next?

*Writing* – Communicate your reflection case. Prepare a short written or
multimedia essay, dealing with your experiences in this course. Share
the results by posting it where others in the broader Peeragogy project
can find it.

*‘Extra credit’* – Contribute back to one of the other organisations or
projects that helped you on this peeragogical journey. Think about what
you have to offer. Is it a bug fix, a constructive critique, pictures,
translation help, PR, wiki-gnoming or making a cake? Make it something
special, and people will remember you and thank you for it.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts IX
(‘[Technologies, Services, and
Platforms](http://peeragogy.org/resources/technologies/)’) and X
(‘[Resources](http://peeragogy.org/resources/)’).

*Recommended reading* – Stallman, Richard. “[Why software should be
free](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/shouldbefree.html)” (1992).

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – When we were deciding how to
license our work, we decided to use CC0, emphasizing ‘re-usability’ and
hoping that other people would come and remix the handbook. At the
moment, we're still waiting to see the first remix edition, but we're
confident that it will come along in due course. Maybe you'll be the one
who makes it!

## Micro-Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 1

Since its conception in early 2012, the Peeragogy Project has collected
over 3700 comments in our discussion forum, and over 200 pages of
expository text in the handbook. It has given contributors a new way of
thinking about things together. However, the project has not had the
levels of engagement that should be possible, given the technology
available, the global interest in improving education, and the number of
thoughful participants who expressed interest. We hope that the handbook
and this accompanying syllabus will provide a seed for a new phase of
learning, with many new contributors and new ideas drawn from real-life
applications.

## Micro-Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 2

10 new handbook contributors joined in the project's second year. We've
begun a series of weekly Hangouts on Air that have brought in many
additional discussants, all key people who can help to fulfil
peeragogy's promise. The handbook has been considerably improved through
edits and discussion. The next step for us is putting this work into
action in the *Peeragogy Accelerator*.

![image](http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-3.jpg)
