**Definition**: Being concrete about what you'd like to do, learn, and
achieve, takes you from thinking about a topic to becoming a
practitioner.

**Problem**: It's easy to think about issues that matter: there are many
of them. The problem is figuring out what you're going to do about it.

**Solution**: Specificity is relatively important in order for things to
happen. Values -- and even metrics -- tend to be less concretely
meaningful than acts. At the same time, while actions speak louder than
words, it's important to act in a coherent way if you want to be
understood by others.

**Example**: In the January, 2013, plenary session,[Independent
Publishers of New England](http://ipne.org) (IPNE) President Tordis
Isselhardt quietly listened to a presentation about how we created the
*Peeragogy Handbook*. During the Q&A, she spoke up, wondering if
peer-learning effort in IPNE might be more likely to succeed if the
organization’s members "focused around a specific project." As this
lightbulb illuminated the room, those of us attending the plenary
session suggested that IPNE could focus the project by creating an
“Independent Publishing Handbook.” (Applause!) In the course of creating
the IPNE Handbook, peer learners would assemble resource repositories,
exchange expertise, and collaboratively edit documents. To provide
motivation and incentive to participate in "PeerPubU", members of the
association will earn authorship credit for contributing articles,
editor credit for working on the manuscript, and can spin off their own
chapters as stand-alone, profit-making publications.

**Challenges**: As often happens, you may realize that your specific
goal is great, as a goal, but too large to tackle directly. It this
case, you may have to find a smaller piece of the project to focus on.
There will, eventually, be the problem of putting together the little
pieces in a coherent way.

**What’s Next**: In the third year of the Peeragogy project, rather than
just keep working on the handbook, we've been working on building a
Peeragogy Accelerator, as a peer support system for projects related to
peer learning and peer production. Not only does specificity help member
projects, being clear about what the Accelerator itself is supposed to
do will help people get involved.
