**Definition**: It is very useful to have an up-to-date public roadmap
for the project, a place where it can be discussed and maintained. The
Roadmap exists as an artifact with which to share current, but never
complete, understanding of the space.

**Problem**: Without a roadmap, there will not be a shared sense of the
project's goals or working methods. It will be much harder for people to
volunteer to help out, or to assess the project's progress.

**Solution**: Keeping a list of current and upcoming activities, as well
as goals and working methods can
help[newcomers](http://peeragogy.org/practice/heuristics/newcomer/) and
old-timers alike see where they can jump in. As we cross things off the
list, this gives a sense of the accomplishments to date, and any major
challenges that lie ahead.

**Examples**:

-   In the Peeragogy project, once the handbook's outline became fairly
    mature, we could use it as a roadmap, by marking the sections that
    are "finished", marking the sections where editing is currently
    taking place, and marking the stubs (possible starting points for
    future contributors). After this outline matured into a real[table
    of contents](http://peeragogy.org/table-of-contents/), we started to
    look in other directions for things to work on, and created
    a[roadmap for further development of the website and peeragogy
    project as a whole](http://peeragogy.org/peeragogy-org-roadmap/).

-   There can be a certain roadmappiness to "presentation of self", and
    you can learn to use this well. For instance, when introducing
    yourself and your work to other people, you can focus on highlights
    like these:

    -   "What is the message behind what you're doing?"

    -   "How do you provide a model others can follow or improve upon?"

    -   "How can others get directly involved with your project?"

**Challenges**: Unless the roadmap is easy for people to see and to
update, they are not likely to use it. In the Peeragogy Accelerator
phase of the project, we've included a roadmap in the “behind the
scenes” version of our landing page, we're using it as a way to link to
other documents we're working on. Accordingly, people participating in
the accelerator frequently encounter the roadmap as a “first level”
object. All of this said, sometimes it's impossible to know in advance
what will happen! A roadmap that's not quite right will feel burdening.
Sometimes it's better to become more open to the unknown.

**What’s Next**: Our roadmap document, which currently includes many
sub-sections, needs refining and re-outlining. We're hoping that our
work in the Accelerator will inform the 3rd edition of the Peeragogy
Handbook, so it's useful to think about the roadmap as a table of
contents for the book. However, since we are not just interested in
writing activities, the current roadmap will develop in different ways
than the first one did. A shared roadmap is very similar to a[Personal
Learning
Plan](http://peeragogy.org/to-peeragogy/personal-learning-plan/), or
"paragogical profile". We made
some[examples](http://campus.ftacademy.org/wiki/index.php/Free_Technology_Guild#Learning_design)
of these as we worked on the Free Technology Guild, but more work would
have to be done before we have a rich ecosystem of peer learning
profiles that people can use to develop a peer learning plan.
