[caption id="" align="aligncenter"
width="304"][![moonshine](http://peeragogy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/moonshine.jpg)](http://peeragogy.org/chapter-summaries/moonshine/)
Distilled for your convenience[/caption]
### Peering into Learning

This is a quick introduction to the main ideas used in the rest of the
book. It provides a range of things to think about as you get started
with a new peer learning project, or as you use peeragogy to redesign
and reassess an existing collaboration. You’ll probably want to read
this first and then do some reflection before diving into the other
parts of the book. **MOTIVATION** You might wonder why we’re doing this
project -- what we hope to get out of it as volunteers, and how we think
what we’re doing can make a positive difference in the world. Hopefully
this chapter will satisfy your curiousity, and show why peeragogy is
important. Have a look at this chapter if you, too, are thinking about
getting involved in peeragogy, or wondering how peeragogy can help you
accelerate your own learning projects. **CASE STUDY: 5PH1NX** We enjoy
riddles with more than one answer, so we’ve included this detailed
narrative example of peeragogy in action near the beginning of the book.
Explore this case study for ideas and encouragement for your own
learning adventures.
### Peeragogy in practice: Patterns, use cases, and examples

**PEERAGOGY IN PRACTICE** In this chapter we show some of the signposts
that can serve as both a key and compass to the kind of social problem
solving that happens in peeragogy projects. If you want some underlying
components to try out, mix and match these and experiment with peeragogy
right away. **THINKING IN PATTERNS, PATTERN HEURISTICS** Here we provide
an overview and examples of what patterns are and what they are used
for, and we outline and investigate patterns and antipatterns that apply
to Peeragogy. You come back for a deeper understanding of the processes
we talk about later on. *Patterns* provide a framework that can be
applied to issues or situations that have repeated effects. Here we
detail those that we have drawn from our own peeragogy practice, that
are also relevant to p2p production projects in general such as
introducing new comers, outlining roles, creating guides or roadmaps,
polling for ideas, and more. *Anti-patterns* deal with frequent
occurrences that are not desirable that apply to peeragogy and peer
production as well such as messiness with lurkers, isolation or weak
ties, distribution of power, navel gazing, and more. *Use cases* present
a scenario or story with actors, actions, and outcomes. These scenarios
provide a platform for examining outcomes patterns or anti-patterns. The
parameters of use cases can be manipulated to establish best paths to
success.
### Convening a Group

You’ll probably want to use this chapter to organize your thinking as
you start a new peeragogy project or think about how to apply peeragogy
ideas in an existing collaboration. A few clusters of simple but
important questions will inspire unique answers for you and your group.
We hope these mental frameworks are helpful to not only initiate
progress, but also to maintain momentum. **PLAY & LEARNING** What makes
learning fun? Just as actors learn their roles through the dynamic
process of performance, In other words, the more we engage with a topic,
the better we learn it and the more satisfying - or fun - the process
becomes. **K-12 PEERAGOGY** The key to becoming a successful ‘connected
educator-learner’ involves spending the time needed to learn how to
learn and share in an open, connected environment. Once you make the
decision to enter into a dialogue with another user, you become a
connected educator/learner and tap into the power of networks to
distribute the load of learning. Depending on their age, you can even
facilitate an awareness of peer networks among your students. **P2P
SELF-ORGANIZING LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS** This conversational section
engages you in a journey through diverse points of entry that interact
with your physical learning space. Within this chapter of word and
picture images, the emerging structure and reciprocal mentoring that may
be inspired causes a ripple effect on those who open the door to its
possibilities.
### Organizing a learning context

We talk about how peer learning is organized into "courses" and
"spaces", again drawing on our experience in the peeragogy project. We
present the results of an informal poll that reveals some of the
positive and some of the negative features of our early choices.
**ADDING STRUCTURE WITH ACTIVITIES** The first rule of thumb for peer
learning is: announce activities only when you plan to take part as a
fully engaged participant. Then ask a series of questions: what is the
goal, what makes it challenging, what worked in other situations, what
recipe is appropriate, what is different about learning about this
topic? **STUDENT AUTHORED SYLLABUS** Here’s one place you might explore
to see ways in which freedom in student-directed learning complements
the structural needs for the content and group. Check this out for
various methods to welcome ambiguity and co-created curriculum into your
projects. You may want to start with one or two ideas in an activity to
transition into this format, yet embracing the risk on a larger scale is
fun as well. **CONNECTIVISM IN PRACTICE** Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) are decentralized online learning experiences: individuals and
groups create blogs or wikis and comment on each other's work, often
with a focus on where to find information. A course typically has a
topic, activities, reading resources and a guest speaker for each week.
Items are tagged to allow for aggregation. Links to technology resources
are provided (such as gRSShopper from Stephen Downes). **PARTICIPATION**
Participation grows from having a community of people who learn
together, using a curriculum as a starting point to organize and trigger
engagement. Keep in mind that participation may follow the 90/9/1
principle (lurkers/editors/authors) and that people may transition
through these roles over time. **THE WORKSCAPE** In a corporate
workscape, people are free-range learners: protect the learning
environment, provide nutrients for growth, and let nature take its
course. A workscape features profiles, an activity stream, wikis,
virtual meetings, blogs, bookmarks, mobile access and a social network.
### Introduction to Cooperation: Co-facilitation

Sometimes omitting the figurehead empowers a group. Co-facilitation
tends to work in groups of people who gather to share common problems
and experiences. The chapter suggests how to co-facilitate discussions,
wiki workflows, and live sessions. Conducting an "after action review"
helps to avoid blind spots. **CO-WORKING** Since statistics indicate a
small percentage of people make a disproportionately large contribution
it comes to getting things done, we've provided some strategies that
distribute engagement. **DESIGNING PEER LEARNING PLATFORMS** This case
study of PlanetMath highlights the five categories of activity (Context,
Engagement, Quality, Structure, and Heuristic) and the workings of the
correction mechanism. **CASE STUDY: COLLABORATIVE EXPLORATIONS** You can
try out this chapter to encourage individuals pursuing their own
interests in a predetermined topic while at the same time influencing
the learning of the whole group by sharing and reflecting upon their
findings. These interactions of supportive mutual inquiry evolve the
content and structure within a short time frame and with open-ended
results.
### Assessment

Asking questions about assessment in the context of the Handbook (Who
needs to know? Based on what data? In what format?) suggests
"usefulness" (real problems solved) is an appropriate metric. We use the
idea of return on investment (the value of changes in behavior divided
by the cost of inducing the change) to assess the peeragogy project
itself, as one example. **RESEARCHING PEERAGOGY** Three new patterns are
introduced (Frontend and Backend, Spanning Set, and Minimum Viable
Project) which form the basis of a “meta-model” that can be used to
study and design for peer learning.
### Technologies, Services, and Platforms

Issues of utility, choice, coaching, impact and roles attach to the wide
variety of tools and technologies available for peer learning. Keys to
selection include the features you need, what people are already using,
and the type of tool (low threshold, wide wall, high ceilings) used for
collaboration. **FORUMS** Forums are web-based communication media that
enable groups of people to conduct organized multimedia discussions
about multiple topics over a period of time, asynchronously. A rubric
for evaluating forum posts highlights the value of drawing connections.
The chapter includes tips on selecting forum software. **WIKI** A wiki
is a website whose users can add, modify, or delete its content via a
web browser. Pages have a feature called “history” which allows users to
see previous versions and roll back to them. The chapter includes tips
on how to use a wiki and select a wiki engine, with particular attention
to peer learning opportunities. **REAL-TIME MEETINGS** Web services
enable broadband-connected learners to communicate in real time via
audio, video, slides, whiteboards, chat, and screen-sharing. Possible
roles for participants in real-time meetings include searchers,
contextualizers, summarizers, lexicographers, mappers, and curators.
This mode of interaction supports emergent agendas.
### Resources

Here we present several ways to get involved in peer learning, including
information about where to find the Peeragogy project online, a sample
syllabus with four actions bring peer learning to life, tips on writing
for The Handbook, and our Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0)
Public Domain Dedication.
