**The Definition**: The wrapper role can be taken on by a project
participant who summarizes everything going on in the project, making
the project comprehensible to participants who haven't been following
all of the details.

**The Problem**: Joining the project that is already going can feel like
trying to get aboard a rapidly moving vehicle. If you've joined and then
taken time off, you may feel like things have moved on so far that it's
impossible to catch up. In a very active project, it can be effectively
impossible to stay up to date with all of the details.

**The Solution**: Charlie
Danoff[suggested](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/wiki/rolesdivision-labor)
that someone take on the "wrapper role" – do a weekly pre/post wrap, so
that new (and existing) users would know the status the project is at
any given point in time. The project's[landing
page](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/) also serves as
another sort of "wrapper", telling people what they can expect to find.

**Objectives**: In fulfilling the wrapper role, we must check the public
summaries of the project from time to time to make sure that they
accurately represent the facts on the ground.

**Examples**: In the first year of the Peeragogy project, the "Weekly
Roundup" by Christopher Tillman Neal served to engage and re-engage
members. Peeragogues began to eager watched for the weekly reports to
see if our teams or our names had been mentioned. When there was a
holiday or break, Chris would announce the hiatus, to keep the flow
going. In the second year of the project, we didn't routinely publish
summaries of progress, and instead, we've assumed that interested
parties will stay tuned on Google+. Nevertheless, we maintain internal
and external summaries, ranging from agendas to press releases to
quick-start guides. Regular meetings provide an alternative way to stay
up to date: see the[Heartbeat](http://peeragogy.org/patterns/heartbeat/)
pattern.

**Challenges**: According to the theory proposed by Yochai Benkler, for
free/open "commons-based" projects to work, it is vital to have both (1)
the ability to contribute small pieces; (2) something that stitches
those pieces together [1]. The wrapper performs this integrative
function, which is often much more challenging than the job of breaking
things down into pieces or just doing one of the small pieces.

**What’s Next**: We're maintaining a Landing Page for the Peeragogy
Accelerator, but people have said that they find the "backstage"
information about the Accelerator confusing. We need practices of
wrapping things up at various levels.

**Reference**:

1.  Benkler, Y. (2002).[Coase's Penguin, or Linux and the Nature of the
    Firm](http://www.yale.edu/yalelj/112/BenklerWEB.pdf), Yale Law
    Journal 112, pp. 369-446.

